ADR-0012: Initial Proposal for Cluster Wide Custom Resources (e.g. ClusterScanType) (#1270)
secureCodeBox/secureCodeBox: docs/adr/adr_0012.md

#### Issues with ConfigMap / Secret Mounts:

Some features of normal scanTypes will not function normally with ClusterScanTypes, especially mounting values from ConfigMaps / Secrets as files / environment variables into your containers as the ConfigMaps / Secrets are not existing in every namespace and there is not sensible way for to roll them out with our helm chart to roll them out.

When deploying cluster scans types you have to make sure that either:

1. All referenced ConfigMaps / Secrets exist in all namespaces. This will likely be done by a script / operator generating these configmaps and persisting them into every namespace
2. Remove all dependencies to ConfigMaps / Secrets from your scanTypes and move these either into the container image of the scanner, or by specifing a initContainer in the ScanType which copies these files over to volume shared with the scanner container. Some more references and discussions on ways to improve this in the future can be found in [ADR-0009: Architecture for pre-populating the file system of scanners"](./adr-0009)

### `ClusterParseDefinition`

> Other then being cluster scoped `ClusterParseDefinition`s are identical to the existing `ParseDefinition` CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than being cluster scoped, `ClusterParseDefinition`s are identical to the existing `ParseDefinition` CRD.
```

When a scan job has completed and the results need to be parsed, the operator should first look for `ParseDefinition`s in the `Scan`s namespace matching the `scantype.spec.extractResults.type` / `clusterscantype.spec.extractResults.type` name configured in the ScanType.
If that is not found the operator should look for `ClusterParseDefinition`s with the same name.
No matter which was picked the `Job` for the parser always has to be started in the namespace of the `Scan`.

> 

Reviewer: I am wondering if there is even a need for namespace specific ParseDefinitions anymore, once cluster-wide parse definitions exist. Is there really a use case where you would parse the results of the same scanner differently, depending on the namespace?

### `ClusterCascadingRule`

> Other then being cluster scoped `ClusterCascadingRule`s are identical to the existing `CascadingRule` CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other than being cluster scoped, `ClusterCascadingRule`s are identical to the existing `CascadingRule` CRD.
```

> When the cascading scans hook starts, the hook should fetch the list of both `CascadingRule`s and `ClusterCascadingRule`s and merge them together into one list which then get's evaluated against the scan just like it is now. All scans started from it have to be in the same namespace of the original `Scan`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the cascading scans hook starts, the hook should fetch the list of both `CascadingRule`s and `ClusterCascadingRule`s and merge them together into one list. The list then gets evaluated against the scan just like it is now. All scans started from it have to be in the same namespace of the original `Scan`.
```

#### Deduplication of CascadingRules

One potential issue with CascadingRule and ClusterCascadingRule is that in contrast to ScanType and ParseDefinition both namespaced and cluster wide types are used. This can be problematic when both the namespace as well as the cluster level have similar / equal CascadingRule installed as this could lead to both producing the same scan which would then be executed twice.

Potential workarounds here would be to introduce an additional field to the CascadingRule spec which allows us to define a sort of "deduplication" / replacement mechanism.

### `ClusterScanCompletionHook`

> `ClusterScanCompletionHook` behave mostly like their namespaced counterpart, when the parser completes the operator fetches the list of ScanCompletionHooks from Scans namespace (respecting the hookSelector of the Scan) and the `ClusterScanCompletionHook`s (also respecting the hookSelector of the Scan (this might have to be discussed...)) are merged and ordered according to the respective priorities set on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ClusterScanCompletionHook` behave mostly like their namespaced counterpart, when the parser completes, the operator fetches the list of ScanCompletionHooks from Scans namespace (respecting the hookSelector of the Scan) and the `ClusterScanCompletionHook`s (also respecting the hookSelector of the Scan (this might have to be discussed...)) are merged and ordered according to the respective priorities set on them.
```

> The execution of the hooks is different to the current model, as there be an additional setting on the `ClusterScanCompletionHook` called namespaceMode which allows users to configure to either run the hook in the same namespace as the scan it is getting executed for, or to provide a fixed namespace where all executions for this `ClusterScanCompletionHook` will be run in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution of the hooks is different to the current model, as there must be an additional setting on the `ClusterScanCompletionHook` called namespaceMode which allows users to configure to either run the hook in the same namespace as the scan it is getting executed for, or to provide a fixed namespace where all executions for this `ClusterScanCompletionHook` will be run in.
```

Example `ClusterScanCompletionHook` specs with this being set:

```yaml
apiVersion: "execution.securecodebox.io/v1"
kind: ClusterScanCompletionHook
metadata:
  name: slack-notification
spec:
  type: ReadAndWrite
  image: "docker.io/securecodebox/notification"

> ```

Reviewer: Is this yaml example necessary? It does not specify the execution namespace. If it is meant to be an example for the same namespace as the scan, I would add a comment to clarify that.

```yaml
apiVersion: "execution.securecodebox.io/v1"
kind: ClusterScanCompletionHook
metadata:
  name: example-cluster-hook
spec:
  # spec.executionNamespace - would let you set a fixed namespace for the hook to get executed in
  executionNamespace: example-namespace-name
  type: ReadAndWrite
  image: "docker.io/securecodebox/notification"
```

This fixed namespace mode has been added to the `ClusterScanCompletionHook` but not for the `ClusterScanType` for the following reasons:

> 1. Hooks are usually used to interface with 3rd party systems which are often standardized for the entire company. Allowing to run them in a namespace separate from the individual teams / scans allows the hook access these systems without having to distribute and thus potentially compromise the credentials for the 3rd party systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Hooks are usually used to interface with 3rd party systems which are often standardized for the entire company. Allowing to run them in a namespace separate from the individual teams / scans allows the hook to access these systems without having to distribute and thus potentially compromise the credentials for the 3rd party systems.
```

> 2. In contrast to scans, hooks usually do not need to send requests to the scanned applications. Scanning a app from outside their namespace opens up a lot of potential issues with network policies blocking inter network traffic between scanner and app. As the hooks only need to access the S3 bucket and the 3rd party system they are interfacing with, this is not a issue for hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In contrast to scans, hooks usually do not need to send requests to the scanned applications. Scanning an app from outside its namespace opens up a lot of potential issues with network policies blocking inter network traffic between scanner and app. As the hooks only need to access the S3 bucket and the 3rd party system they are interfacing with, this is not an issue for hooks.
```

#### Potential Issues With the Fixed `executionNamespace` Mode

> Can lead to inter team conflicts if a scans of "team 1" fails because of a error in the `ClusterScanCompletionHook` managed by a central cluster team. Members of "team 1" will likely not even have access to the namespace the failing hooks run in and wont be able to debug / fix these issues by their self.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Can lead to conflicts between teams if a scan of "team 1" fails because of an error in the `ClusterScanCompletionHook` managed by a "central cluster team". Members of "team 1" will likely not even have access to the namespace the failing hooks run in and won't be able to debug / fix these issues by themselves.
```
